This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.
http://books.google.com

GREAT EXPECTATIONS
CHARLES DICKENS










CHARLES DICKENS' COMPLETE WORKS.
THE CAMBRIDGE EDITION.
With 650 Illustrations on Steel and Wood by Cruikshank, Phiz, Barnard, De Neuville, and others.
GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
BY
CHARLES DICKENS.
BOSTON:
PUBLISHED BY ESTES AND LAURIAT,
301-305 Washington Street.
1 881.

CONTENTS.
GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
CHAPTER PACE 1 21 II 26 "1 35 IV. 41 V 50 VI 61 VII 63 VIII 74 IX 87 X 95 XI 102 XII 116 XIII 122 XIV 130 XV. 132 XVI 144 XVII 149 XVIII 158 XIX 172 XX 187 XXI 196 XXII 201 XXIII 214 XXIV 223 XXV 230 XXVI 238 XXVII 2,6 XXVIII 254 XXIX 261 XXX 274 XXXI 283 XXXII 289
iv
* CONTENTS.
CHAPTRR PAGtt XXXIII 295 XXXIV 303 XXXV 309 XXXVI 317 XXXVII 324 XXXVIII 332 XXXIX 345 XL. 357 XLI 371 XLII 377 XLI1 1 385 XLIV 391 XLV 399 XLVI 407 XLVII 415 XLVIII 422 XLIX 429 L. 439 LI 444 LI 1 452 LIU 458 LIV 471 LV 485 LVI 493 LVII 499 LVIII 512 LIX 520
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Then she softly patted my Shoulder in a soothing
way Frontispiece.
TO FACE PAGE
"Tell us your Name 1" said the Man, "quick1" . . 22
Then Joe began to Hammer and Clink, Hammer and
Clink 52
"Who is it?" said the bady at the Table. "Pip,
Ma'am " 78
"Which I meantersay, Pip" 123
" Hulloa," he growled ; " Where are you Two
GOING?" 15;
"And may I ▒ may I ▒ ?" 179
" This Chap murdered his Master " 226
" Hold me 1 I 'm so Frightened 1 " 275
"Oh, you must take the Purse!" 294
"If I say Yes, may I kiss the Cheek again?" . . . 298
I rose out of my Chair, and stood with my Hand
upon the Back of it, looking wildly at him . .351
"Look here," said Herbert 409
I entreated her to rise 432
" Do you know This ? " said he 461
vi ILLUSTRATIONS.
TO FACE PACK
He was taken on Board, and instantly manacled
at the Wrists and Ankles 482
The placid look at the white Ceiling came back,
and passed away, and his head dropped quietly
on his Breast 498
I saw the Shadow of no parting from her .... 523
GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
CHAPTER L
My father's family name being Pirrip, and my Christian name
Philip, my infant tongue could make of both names nothing
longer or more explicit than Pip. So I called myself Pip, and
came to be called Pip.
I give Pirrip as my father's family name, on the authority
of his tombstone and my sister▒Mrs. Joe Gargery, who mar
ried the blacksmith. As I never saw my father or my mother,
and never saw any likeness of either of them (for their days
were long before the days of photographs), my first fancies re
garding what they were like were unreasonably derived from
their tombstones. The shape of the letters on my father's gave
me an odd idea that he was a square, stout, dark man with
curly black hair. From the character and turn of the inscrip
tion, "also Georgiana wife of the above," I drew a childish
conclusion that my mother was freckled and sickly. To five
little stone lozenges, each about a foot and a half long, which
were arranged in a neat row beside their grave, and were sacred
to the memory of five little brothers of mine▒who gave up
trying to get a living exceedingly early in that universal strug
gle▒I am indebted for a belief I religiously entertained that
they had all been born on their backs with their hands in their
trowsers-pockets, and had never taken them out in this state
of existence.
Ours was the marsh country, down by the river, within, as
the river wound, twenty miles of the sea. My first distinct
impression of the identity of things seems to me to have been
gained on a memorable raw, damp afternoon toward evening,
(21)
82 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
At such a time I found out for certain that this bleak place
overgrown with nettles was the church-yard ; and that Tobias
Pirrip, late of this Parish, and also Georgiana, wife of the
above, were dead and buried; and that Alexander, Barthol
omew, Abraham, George, and Robert, infant children of the
aforesaid, were also dead and buried ; and that the dark, flat
wilderness beyond the church-yard, intersected with dikes and
mounds and gates, with scattered cattle feeding on it, was the
marshes ; and that the low leaden line beyond was the river ;
and that the distant-savage lair from which the wind was rush
ing, was the sea ; and that the small bundle of shivers growing
afraid of it all and beginning to cry, was Pip.
" Hold your noise 1" cried a terrible voice, as a man started
up from among the graves at the side of the church-porch.
" Hold your noise, you little devil, or I'll cut your throat 1"
A fearful man, all in gray, with a great iron on his leg. A
man with no hat, and broken shoes, and with an old rag tied
round his head. A man who had been soaked in water and
smothered in mud, and lamed by stones, and cut by flints, and
stung by nettles, and torn by briers ; who limped, and shivered,
and glared, and growled ; and whose teeth chattered in his
head as he seized me by the chin.
"Don't cut my throat, Sir 1" I pleaded in terror. "Pray
don't do it, Sir 1"
" Tell us your name 1" said the man. " Quick 1"
"Pip, Sir."
" Once more," said the man. " Give it mouth 1"
"Pip. Pip, Sir."
"Show us where you live," said the man. "Pint out the
place 1"
I pointed to where our village lay on the flat in-shore among
the alder-trees and pollards, a mile or more from the church.
The man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me up
side-down, and emptied my pockets. There was nothing in
them but a piece of bread. When the church came to itself'▒
for he was so sudden and strong that he made it go head over
heels before me, and I saw the steeple under my legs▒when
the church came to itself, I say, I was seated on a high tomb
stone trembling, while he ate the bread ravenously.


GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 23
"You young dog!" said the man, licking his lips at me,
" what fat cheeks you ha' got !"
I believe they were fat, though I was at that time undersized
for my years, and not strong.
" Damned if I couldn't eat 'em," said the man, with a threat
ening shake of his head, " and if I han't half a mind to 't !"
I earnestly expressed my hope th- he wouldn't, and held
tighter to the tombstone on which ht- ad put me ; partly to
keep myself upon it, partly to keep myself from crying.
" Now then, lookie here 1" said the man. " Where's your
mother ?"
"There, Sir!" said I.
He started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over
his shoulder.
" There, Sir 1" I timidly explained. " Also Gegiorana.
That's my mother."
" Oho 1" said he, coming back. " And is that your father
alonger your mother ?"
" Yes, Sir," said I ; " him too ; late of this parish."
" Ha 1" he muttered then, considering. " Who d'ye live with
▒supposin' you're kindly let to live, which I han't made up my
mind about ?"
"My sister, Sir▒Mrs. Joe Gargery▒wife of Joe Gargery,
the blacksmith, Sir."
"Blacksmith, eh ?" said he. And looked down at his leg.
After darkly looking at his leg and at me several times, he
came closer to my tombstone, took me by both arms, and tilted
me back as far as he could hold me ; so that his eyes looked
most powerfully down into mine, and mine looked most help
lessly up into his.
" Now lookie here," he said, " the ipjestion being whether
you're to be let to live. You know what a file is ?"
"Yes, Sir."
"And you know what wittles is ?"
"Yes, Sir."
After each question he tilted me over a little more, so as to
give me a greater sense of helplessness and danger.
"You get me a file." He tilted me again. "And you get
me wittles." He tilted me again. " You bring 'em both to me."
24 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
He tilted me again. " Or I'll have your heart and liver out."
He tilted me again.
I was dreadfully frightened, and so giddy that I clung to
him with both hands, and said, "If you would kindly please
to let me keep upright, Sir, perhaps I shouldn't be sick, and
perhaps I could attend more."
He gave me a most tremendous dip and roll, so that the
church jumped over its own weathercock. Then he held me
by the arms, in an upright position on the top of the stone, and
went on in these fearful terms :
"You bring me, to-morrow morning early, that file, and them
wittles. You bring the lot to me at that old Battery over
yonder. You do this, and you never dare to say a word, or
dare to make a sign concerning your haven't seen such a person
as me, or any person, and you shall be let to live. You fail,
or you go from my words in any partickler, no matter how small
the partickler, and your heart and your liver shall be tore out,
roasted, and ate. Now I ain't alone, as you may think I am.
There's a young man hid with me, in comparison with which
young man I am a Angel o' light. That young man hears the
words I speak. That young man has a secret way pecooliar to
himself, of getting at a boy, and at his heart, and at his liver.
It is in wain for a boy to attempt to hide himself from that
young man. A boy may lock his door, may be warm in bed,
may tuck himself up, may draw the clothes over his head, may
think himself comfortable and safe ; but that young man will
softly creep and creep his way to him and tear him open. I am
a keepin' that young man from harmin' of you at the present
moment, with great difficulty. I find it very hard to hold that
young man off of your inside. Now, what do you say?"
I said that I would get him the file, and I would get him
what broken bits of food I could, and I would come to him
at the Battery, early in the morning.
" Say Lord strike you dead if you don't ?" said the man.
I said so, and he took me down.
"Now," he pursued, "you remember what you've under
took, and you remember that young man, and you get
home !" " Goo-good-night, Sir," I faltered.
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 2.0
" Much of that !" said he, glancing about him over the cold
wet flat. " I wish I was a frog. Or a eel 1"
At the same time he hugged his shuddering body in both
his arms▒clasping himself, as if to hold himself together▒
and limped toward the low church wall. As I saw him go,
picking his way among the nettles, and among the brambles
that bound the evergreen mounds, he looked in my young eyes,
as if he were eluding the hands of the dead people, stretching
up cautiously out of their graves, to get a twist upon his ankle
and pull him in.
When he came to the low church wall, he got over it, like a
man whose legs were numbed and stiff, and then turned round
to look for me. When I saw him turning, I set my face toward
home, and made the best use of my legs. But presently I
looked over my shoulder, and saw him going on again toward
the river, still hugging himself in both arms, and picking his
way with his sore feet among the great stones dropped into the
marshes here and there, for stepping-places when the rains were
heavy, or the tide was in.
The marshes were just a long black horizontal line then, as
I stopped to look after him ; and the river was just another
horizontal line not nearly so broad nor yet so black ; and the
sky was just a row of long angry red lines, and dense black lines
intermixed. On the edge of the river I could faintly make out
the only two black things in all the prospect that seemed to
be standing upright ; one of these was the beacon by which the
sailors steered▒-like an unhooped cask upon a pole▒an ugly
slimy thing when you were near it; the other, a gibbet with
some chains hanging to it which had once held a pirate. The
man was limping on toward this latter, as if he were the pirate
coming to life and come down, and goin>; back to hook himself
up again. It gave me a terrible turn when I thought so ; and
as I saw the black cattle lifting their heads to gaze after him,
I wondered whether they thought so too. I looked all around
for the horrible young man, and could see no signs of him.
But now I was frightened again, and ran home without stop
ping.
CHAPTER II.
My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, was more than twenty years
older than I, and had established a great reputation with her
self and the neighbors because she had brought me up "by
hand." Having at that time to find out for myself what the
expression meant, and knowing her to have a hard and heavy
hand, and to be much in the habit of laying it upon her hus
band, as well as upon me, I supposed that Joe Gargery and
I were both brought up by hand. She was not a good-looking woman, my sister ; and I had a
general impression that she must have made Joe Gargery
marry her by hand. Joe was a fair man, with curls of flaxen
hair on each side of his smooth face, and eyes of such a very
undecided blue that they seemed to have somehow got mixed
with their own whites. He was a mild, good-natured, sweettempered,
easy-going, foolish, dear fellow▒a sort of Hercules
in strength, and also in weakness.
My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes, had such a
prevailing redness of skin that I sometimes used to wonder
whether it was possible she washed herself with a nutmeggrater
instead of soap. She was tall and bony, and almost
always wore a coarse apron, fastened over her figure behind
with two loops, and having a square, impregnable bit in front
that was stuck full of pins and needles. She made it a powerful
merit in herself, and a strong reproach against Joe, that she
wore this apron so much. Though I really see no reason now
why she should have worn it at all ; or why, if she did wear it
at all, she should not have taken it off every day of her life.
Joe's forge adjoined our house, which was a wooden house,
as many of the dwellings in our country were▒most of them,
at that time. When I ran home from the church-yard, the
forge was shot up, and Joe was fitting alone in the kitchen.
(26)
GREAT EXPECTATIONS -27
Joe and I being fellow-sufferers, and having confidence as such,
Joe imparted a confidence to me the moment I raised the latch
of the door and peeped in at him opposite to it, sitting in the
chimney-corner.
" Mrs. Joe has been out a dozen times, looking for you, Pip;
and she's out now, making it a baker's dozen."
" Is she ?"
" Yes, Pip," said Joe ; " and what's worse, she's got Tickler
with her."
At this dismal intelligence I twisted the only button on my
waistcoat round and round, and looked in great depression at
the fire. Tickler was a wax-ended piece of cane, worn
smooth by collision with my tickled frame.
"She sat down," said Joe, "and she got up, and she made
a grab at Tickler, and she ram-paged out. That's what she
did," said Joe, slowly clearing the fire between the bars with
the poker; "she ram-paged out, Pip."
" Has she been gone long, Joe ?" I always treated him as
a larger species of child, and as no more than my equal.
" Well," said Joe, looking up at the Dutch clock, " she's been
on the Ram-page, this last spell, about five minutes, Pip. She's
a coming 1 Get behind the door, old chap, and have the jacktowel
betwixt you."
I took the advice. My sister, Mrs. Joe, throwing the door
wide open, and finding an obstruction behind it, immediately
divined the cause, and applied Tickler to further investiga
tion. She concluded by showing me. I often served her as
a connubial missile at Joe, who, glad to get hold of me on
any terms, passed me on into the chimney and quietly fenced
me there with his great legs.
"Where have you been, you young monkey?" said Mrs.
Joe, stamping her foot. " Tell me directly what you've been
doing to wear me away with fret and fright and worrit, or I'd
have you out of that corner if you was fifty Pips and he was
five hundred Gargerys."
" I have only been to the church-yard," said I, from my stool,
crying and rubbing myself.
" Church-yard 1" repeated my sister. " If it warn't for me
-28 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
you'd have been to the church-yard long ago, and staid there.
Who brought you up by hand ?"
"You did," said I.
"And why did I do it, I should like to know 1" exclaimed
my sister.
I whimpered, "I don't know."
" I don't 1" said my sister. " I'd never do it again 1 I know
that. I may truly say I've never had this apron of mine off
since born you were. It's bad enough to be a blacksmith's
wife (and him a Gargery), without being your mother."
My thoughts strayed from that question as I looked discon
solately at the fire. For the fugitive out on the marshes with
the ironed leg, the mysterious young man, the file, the victuals,
and the dreadful pledge I was under to commit a larceny on
those sheltering premises, rose before me in the avenging coals.
" Hah 1" said Mrs. Joe, restoring Tickler to his station.
" Church-yard, indeed 1 You may well say church-yard, you
two." One of us, by-the-by, had not said it at all. "You'll
drive me to the church-yard betwixt you one of these days, and
oh, a- pr-r-recious pair you'd be without me!"
As she applied herself to set the tea-things, Joe peeped
down at me over his leg, as if he were mentally casting me and
himself up, and calculating what kind of pair we practically
should make, under the grievous circumstances foreshadowed.
After that, he sat feeling his right-side flaxen curls and
whisker, and following Mrs. Joe about with his blue eyes, as his
manner always was at squally times.
My sister had a trenchant way of cutting our bread-andbutter
for us, that never varied. First, with her left hand she
held the loaf, hard and fast, against her bib▒where it some
times got a pin into it, and sometimes a needle, which we after
ward got into our mouths. Then she took some butter (not
too much) on a knife and spread it on the loaf in an apothecary
kind of way, as if she were making a plaster▒using both sides
of the knife with a slapping dexterity, and trimming and
moulding the butter off round the crust. Then she gave the
knife a final smart wipe on the edge of the plaster, and then
sawed a very thick round off the loaf, which she finally, before
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 29
separating from the loaf, hewed into two halves : of which Joe
got one, and I the other.
On the present occasion, though I was hungry, I dared
not eat my slice. I felt that I must have something in reserve
for my dreadful acquaintance and his ally, the still more
dreadful young man. I knew Mrs. Joe's housekeeping to be
of the strictest kind, and that my larcenous researches in the
dead of night might find nothing available in the safe, there
fore I resolved to put my hunk of bread-and-butter down
the leg of my trowsers.
The effort of resolution necessary to the achievement of this
purpose I found to be quite awful. It was as if I had to
make up my mind to leap from the top of a high house, or
plunge into a great depth of water. And it was made the
more difficult by the unconscious Joe. In our above-mentioned
freemasonry as fellow-sufferers, and in his good-natured com
panionship with me, it was our evening habit to compare
the way we bit through our slices by silently holding them
up to each other's admiration now and then▒which in general
led us to new exertions. To-night Joe several times invited
me, by the display of his fast-diminishing slice, to enter
upon our usual friendly competition ; but he found me each
time with my yellow mug of tea on one knee, and my untouched
bread-and-butter on the other. At last, I desperately con
sidered that the thing I contemplated must be done, and that
it had best be done in the least improbable manner consistent
with the circumstances. I took advantage of a moment
when Joe had just looked aside, and got my bread-andbutter
down my leg.
Joe was evidently made uncomfortable by what he supposed
to be my loss of appetite, and took a thoughtful semicircular
bite out of his slice, which he didn't seem to enjoy. He rolled
it about in his mouth much longer than usual, pondering over
it a good deal, and after all gulped it down like a pill. He
was about to take another bite, and had just got his head on
one side for a good purchase on it, when his eye fell on me,
and he saw that my bread-and-butter was gone.
The wonder and consternation with which Joe stopped on
30 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
the threshold of his bite and stared at me were too evident
to escape my sister's observation.
" What's the matter now ?" said she smartly, as she put
down her cup.
"I say, you know 1" muttered Joe, shaking his head at me
in very serious remonstrances, "Pip, old chap 1 You'll do
yourself a mischief. It'll stick somewhere. You can't have
chawed it, Pip."
" What's the matter now ?" repeated my sister, more sharply
than before.
" If you can cough any trifle on it up, Pip, I'd recommend
you to do it," said Joe, all aghast. " Manners is manners,
but still yourelth's your elth."
By this time my sister was quite desperate, so she pounced
on Joe, and taking him by the two whiskers, knocked his head
for a little while against the wall behind him : while I sat
in the corner looking guiltily on.
"Now, perhaps you'll mention what's the matter," said my
sister, out of breath, " you staring great stuck pig."
Joe looked at her in a helpless way ; then took a helpless
bite and looked at mfe again.
" You know, Pip," said Joe, solemnly, with his last bite in
his cheek, and speaking in a confidential tone, as if we were
quite alone, "you and me is always friends, and I'd be the
last to tell upon you any time. But such a"▒he moved his
chair and looked about the floor between us, and then again
at me▒"such a honcommon Bolt as that !"
" Been bolting his food, has he ?" cried my sister.
"You know, old chap," said Joe, looking at me, and not
Mrs. Joe, with his bite still in his cheek, " I Bolted, myself,
when I was your age▒frequent▒and as a boy I've been
among a many Bolters ; but I never see your equal yet,
Pip, and it's a mercy you ain't choked dead."
My sister made a dive at me, and fished me up by the hair :
saying nothing more than the awful words, "you come along
and be dosed."
Some medical beast had revived Tar-water in those days as
a fine medicine, and Mrs. Joe always kept a supply of it in
the cupboard ; having a belief in its virtues correspondent to
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 31
its horrible nastiness. At the best of times so much of this
elixir was administered to me as a choice restorative, that I
was conscious of going about, smelling like a new fence. On
this particular evening the urgency of my case demanded a
pint of this mixture, which was poured down my throat, for
my greater comfort, while Mrs. Joe held my head under her
arm as a boot would be held in a boot-jack. Joe got off with
half-a-pint ; but was made to take that (much to his disturbance,
as he sat slowly biting and meditating before the fire),
"because he had had a turn." Judging for myself, I should
say he certainly had one afterward, if he had had none before.
Conscience is a dreadful thing when it accuses man or boy ;
but when, in the case of a boy, that secret burden co-operates
with another secret burden down the leg of his trowsers, it is
(as I can testify) a great punishment. The guilty knowledge
that I was going to rob Mrs. Joe▒I .never thought I was
going to rob Joe, for I never thought of any of the house
keeping property as his▒united to the necessity of always
keeping one hand on the bread-and-butter as I sat, or when
I was ordered about the kitchen on any small errand, almost
drove me out of my mind. Then, as the March winds
made the fire glow and flare, I thought I heard the fierce
voice outside of the man with the iron on his leg who had
sworn me to secrecy, declaring that he couldn't and wouldn't
starve until to-morrow, but must be fed now. At other times,
I thought, what if the young man who was with so much
difficulty restrained from imbruing his hands in me, should
either yield to his constitutional impatience, or should mistake
the time, and should think himself accredited to my heart and
liver to-night, instead of to-morrow 1 If ever any body's
hair stood on end with terror, mine must have done so then.
But, perhaps, nobody's ever did ?
It was Christmas eve, and I had to stir the pudding for next
day, with the copper-stick, from seven to eight by the Dutch
clock. I tried it with the load upon my leg (and that made
me think afresh of the man with the iron on his leg), and
found the tendency of exercise to bring the bread-and-butter
out at my ancle, quite unmanageable and unconquerable.
32 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
Happily I slipped away, and deposited that part of my con
science in my garret bedroom.
" Hark 1" said I, when I had done my stirring, and was
taking a final warm in the chimney corner before being sent
up to bed ; " was that guns, Joe ?"
" Ah 1" said Joe. " There's another conwict off."
" What does that mean, Joe ?" said I.
Mrs. Joe, who always took explanations upon herself, said,
snappishly, " Escaped. Escaped." Administering the defini
tion like Tar-water.
While Mrs. Joe sat with her head bending over her needle
work, I put my mouth into the forms of saying to Joe,
" What's a convict ?" Joe put his mouth into the forms of
returning such a highly elaborate answer, that I could make
out nothing of it but the single word "Pip."
" There was one off last night," said Joe, aloud, " after
sunset-gun. And they fired warning of him. And now, it
appears, they're firing warning of another."
" Who's firing ?" said I.
" Drat that child," interposed my sister, frowning at me
over her work, " what a questioner he is. Ask no questions,
and you'll be told no lies."
It was not very polite to herself, I thought, to imply that
I should be told lies by her, even if I did ask questions. But
she never was polite, unless there was company.
At this point Joe greatly augmented my curiosity by taking
the utmost pains to open his mouth very wide, and put it into
the form of a word that looked to me like " sulks." There
fore I naturally pointed to Mrs. Joe, and put my mouth into
the form of saying "her?" But Joe wouldn't hear of that at
all and again opened his mouth very wide, and shook the form
of a most emphatic word out of it. But I could make nothing
of the word.
"Mrs. Joe," said I, as a last resource, "I should like to
know▒if you wouldn't much mind▒where the firing comes
from ?"
" Lord bless the boy 1" exclaimed my sister, as if she didn't
quite mean that, but rather the contrary. " From the Hulks."
" Oh-ho 1" said I, looking at Joe. " Hulks 1"
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 33
Joe gave a reproachful cough, as much as to say, " Well, I
told you so."
'- And please what's Hulks ?" said I.
"That's the way with this boy 1" exclaimed my sister, point
ing me out with her needle and thread, and shaking her head.
" Answer him one question, and he'll ask you a dozen directly.
Hulks are prison-ships, right 'cross th' meshes." We always
used that name for marshes, in our country.
" I wonder who's put into prison-ships, and why they're
put there ?" said I, in a general way, and with desperation.
It was too much for Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose. "I
tell you what, young man," said she, " I didn't bring you up
by hand to badger people's lives out. It would be blame to
me, and not praise, if I had. People are put in the Hulks
because they murder, and because they rob, and do all sorts
of bad; and they almost always begin by asking questions.
Now you get along to bed I"
I was never allowed a candle to light me to bed, and, as I
went up stairs in the dark, with my head tingling from Mrs.
Joe's thimble, having played the tambourine upon it to ac
company her last words, I felt fearfully sensible of the great
convenience that the Hulks were handy for me. I was clearly
on my way there. I had begun by asking questions, and I was
going to rob Mrs. Joe.
Since that time, which is far enough away now, I have
often thought that few people know what secrecy there is in
the young, under terror. No matter how unreasonable the
terror, so that it be terror. I was in mortal terror of the
young man who wanted my heart and liver ; I was in mortal
terror of my interlocutor with the ironed leg ; I was in mortal
terror of myself, from whom an awful promise had been ex
tracted ; I had no hope of deliverance through my all-powerful
sister, who repulsed me at every turn ; I am afraid to think,
even now, of what I might have done, upon requirement, in
the secrecy of my terror.
If I slept at all that night, it was only to imagine myself
drifting down the river on a strong spring tide to the Hulks ;
a ghostly pirate calling out to me through a speaking trumpet,
as I passed the gibbet-station, that I had better come ashore,
2
84 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
and be hanged there at once, and not put it off. I was afraid
to sleep, even if I had been inclined, for I knew that at the
first faint dawn of morning I must rob the pantry. There was
no getting a light by easy friction then ; to have got one I
must have struck it out of flint and steel, and have made a
noise like the very pirate himself rattling his chains.
As soon as the great black velvet pall outside my little
window was shot with gray, I got up and went down stairs :
every board upon the way, and every crack in every board,
calling after me "Stop thief 1" and "Get up, Mrs. Joe!" In
the pantry, which was far more abundantly supplied than
usual, owing to the season, I was very much alarmed by a
hare hanging up by the heels, whom I rather thought I caught,
when my back was half turned, waking. I had no time for
verification, no time for selection, no time for any thing, for I
had no time to spare. I stole some bread, some rind of cheese,
about half ajar of mince-meat (which I tied up in my pockethandkerchief
with my last night's slice), some brandy from a
stone bottle (which I decanted into a glass bottle I had secretly
used for making that intoxicating fluid, Spanish-liquoricewater,
up in my room : diluting the stone bo.ttle from a jug
in the kitchen cupboard), a meat bone with very little on it,
and a beautiful round, compact pork-pie. I was nearly going
away without the pie, but I was tempted to mount upon a
shelf to look what it was that was put away so carefully in a
covered earthenware dish in a corner, and I found it was the
pie, and I took it in the hope that it was not intended for
early use, and would not be missed for some time.
There was a door in the kitchen communicating with the
forge ; I unlocked and unbolted that door, and got a file from
among Joe's tools. Then I put the fastenings as I had found
them, opened the door at which I had entered when I ran
home last night, shut it, and ran for the misty marshes.
CHAPTER III.
It was a rimy morning, and very damp. I had seen the
damp lying on the outside of my little window, as if some
goblin had been crying there all night, and using the window
for a pocket-handkerchief. Now I saw the damp lying on the
bare hedges and spare grass, like a coarser sort of spiders'
webs ; hanging itself from twig to twig and blade to blade.
On every rail and gate wet lay clammy ; and the marsh mist
was so thick that the wooden finger on the post, directing
people to our village ▒a direction which they never accepted,
for they never came there▒was invisible to me until I was quite
close under it. Then, as I looked up at it, while it dripped,
it seemed, to my oppressed conscience like a phantom devot
ing me to the Hulks.
The mist was heavier yet when I got out upon the marshes,
so that, instead of my running at every thing, every thing
seemed to run at me. This was very disagreeable to a quiet
mind. The gates and dikes and banks came bursting at me
through the mist, as if they cried as plainly as could be, "A
boy with a pork-pie 1 Stop him 1" The black cattle came
upon me with like suddenness, staring out of their eyes, and
smoking out of their nostrils, "Halloa, young thief 1" One
black ox, with a white cravat on▒who had to my awakened
conscience something of a clerical air▒fixed me so steadily
with his eyes, and moved his blunt head round in such an ac
cusatory manner as I moved round, that I called out to him,
" I couldn't help it ! It wasn't for myself I took it I" Upon
which he put down his head, blew a cloud of smoke out of his
nose, and vanished with a kick-up of his hind leg and flourish
of his tail.
All this time I was getting on toward the river ; but how
ever fast I went; I couldn't warm my feet, to which the damp
<35)
M GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
cold seemed riveted, as the iron was riveted to the leg of the
man I was running to meet. I knew my way to the Battery
pretty straight, for I had been down there on a Sunday with
Joe, and Joe had, sitting on an old gun, told me that when I
was 'prentice to him regularly bound, we would have such
I,arks there as should recompense us for our constraint at
home. However, in the confusion of the mist, I found myself
at last too far to the right, and consequently had to try back
along the river-side, on the bank of loose stones above the
mud and the stakes that staked the tide out, to come at the
Battery. Making my way along here with all dispatch, I had
just crossed a ditch which I knew to be very near the Battery,
and had just scrambled up the mound beyond the ditch, when
I saw the man sitting before me. His back was toward me,
and he had got his arms folded, and was nodding forward
heavy with sleep. I thought he would be more glad if I came upon him with
his breakfast in that unexpected manner, so I went forward
softly and touched him on the shoulder. He instantly jumped
up, and it was not the man, but another man 1
And yet he was dressed in coarse gray, too, and had a
great iron on his leg, and was lame, and hoarse, and cold, and
was every thing that the other man was ; except that he had
not the same face, and had a flat, broad-brimmed, low-crowned
felt hat on. All this I saw in a moment, for I had only a
moment to see it in ; he swore an oath at me, made a hit
at me▒it was a round weak blow that missed me and almost
knocked himself down, for it made him stumble▒and then
he ran into the mist, tumbling twice as he went, and I lost
him." It's the young man 1" I thought. I felt my heart shoot as
I identified him ; and I dare say I should have felt a pain in my
liver, too, if I had known where it was.
I was soon at the Battery after that, and there was the man
▒hugging himself and limping to and fro, as if he had never
all night left off hugging and limping▒waiting for me. He
was awfully cold, to be sure. I half expected to see him drop
down before my face and die of cold. His eyes looked so
awfully hungry, too, that when I handed him the file it occurred
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 37
to me he would have tried to eat it, if he had not seen my
bundle. He did not turn me upside down, this time, to get
at what I had, but left me right side upward while I opened
the bundle and emptied my pockets.
" What's in the bottle, boy ?" said he.
" Brandy," said I.
He was already handing mince-meat down his throat in
the most curious manner, more like a man who was putting
it away somewhere in a violent hurry than a man who was
eating it▒but he left off to take some of the liquor, shivering
all the while so violently that it was quite as much as he could
do to keep the neck of the bottle between his teeth.
" I think you have got the ague," said I.
" I'm much of your opinion, boy," said he.
"It's bad about here. You've been lying out on the ->
meshes, and they're dreadful aguish. Rheumatic, too."
" I'll eat my breakfast afore they're the death of me,"
said he. " I'd do that, if I was going to be strung up to that
there gallows as there is over there directly arterward. I'll
beat the shivers so far, I'll bet you a guinea."
He was gobbling mince-meat, meat, bone, bread, cheese,
and pork-pie all at once : staring distrustfully while he did so
at the mist all round us, and often stopping▒even stopping
his jaws▒to listen. Some real or fancied sound, some clink
upon the river or breathing of beasts upon the marsh, now
gave him a start, and he said, suddenly :
"You're not a false imp? You brought no one with
you ?"
"No, sir! No!"
" Nor give no one the office to follow you ?"
"No!" " Well," said he, " I believe you. You'd be but a fierce
young hound indeed, if at your time of life you could
help to hunt a wretched warmint, hunted as near death and
dunghill as this poor wretched warmint is 1"
Something clicked in his throat, as if he had works in him
like a clock, and was going to strike. And he smeared his
ragged, rough sleeve over his eyes.
Pitying his desolation, and watching him as he gradually
38 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
settled down upon the pie, I made bold to say, " I am glad you
enjoy it."
" Did you speak ? "
" I said I was glad you enjoyed it."
"Thankee, my boy. I do."
I had often watched a large dog of ours eating his food ; and
I now noticed a decided similarity between the dog's way of
eating and the man's. The man took strong, sharp, sudden
bites, just like the dog. He swallowed, or rather snapped
up, every mouthful too soon and too fast ; and he looked side
ways here and there while he ate, as if he thought there was
danger of somebody's coming to take the pie away. He was
altogether too unsettled in his mind over it to appreciate it
comfortably, I thought, or to have any body to dine with him,
without making a chop with his jaws at the visitor. In all
of which particulars he was very like the dog.
"You won't leave any of it for him," said I, timidly, after
a silence during which I had hesitated as to the politeness of
making the remark. " There's no more to be got where that
came from." It was the certainty of this fact that impelled me
to offer the hint.
" Leave for him ? Who's him?" said my friend, stopping in
his crunching of pie-crust.
" The young man. That you spoke of. That was hid with
you."
" Oh, ah 1" he returned, with something like a gruff laugh.
"Him? Yes, yes 1 He don't want no wittles."
" I thought he looked as if he did," said I.
The man stopped eating, and regarded me with the closest
scrutiny and the greatest surprise.
" Looked ? When ?"
" Just now 1"
" Where ?"
" Yonder," said I, pointing ; " over there, where I found
him nodding asleep, and thought it was you."
He held me by the collar and stared at me so, that I began
to think his first idea about cutting my throat had revived.
" Dressed like you, you know, only with a hat," I explained,
trembling; "and▒and"▒I was very anxious to put it delicately
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 39
▒"and with▒the same reason for wanting to borrow a file
Didn't you hear the gun last night?"
" Then there was firing 1" he said to himself.
" I wonder you shouldn't have been sure of that," I returned,
"for we heard it up at home, and that's further away, and we
were shut in besides."
"Why, see now 1" said he. "When a man's alone on these
flats, with a light head and a light stomach, perishin' of cold
and want, he hears nothin' all night but guns firin', and voices
callin'. Hears ? He sees the soldiers with their red coats,
lij-hted up by the torches carried afore, closin' in round
him. Hears his number called, hears himself challenged, hears
the rattle of the muskets, hears the orders, ' Make ready 1
Present ! ▒Cover him steady, men 1' and is laid hands on, and
there's nothing 1 Why, if I see one pursuing party last night
▒coming up in order, Damn 'em, with their tramp, tramp▒
I see a hundred. And as to firin' 1 Why, I see the mist
shake with the cannon, when it was broad day. ▒But this man"
▒he had said all the rest as if he had forgotten my being
there▒''did you notice any thing in him ?"
" He had a bruised face," said I, recalling what I hardly
knew I knew.
" Not here ?" exclaimed the man, striking his left cheek
with the flat of his hand.
"Yes! There 1"
" Where is he ?" He crammed what little food was left into
the breast of his gray jacket. " Show me the way he went.
I'll pull him down like a blood-hound. Curse this iron on my
sore leg 1 Give us hold of the file, boy."
I indicated in what direction. The mist had shrouded the
other man, and he looked up at it for an instant. But he was
down on the rank wet grass, filing at his iron like a madman,
and not minding me or minding his own leg, which had an old
chafe upon it and was bloody, but which he handled as roughly
as if it had no more feeling in it than the file. I was very
much afraid of him again, now that he had worked himself into
this fierce hurry, and I was likewise very much afraid of keeping
away from home any longer. I told him I must go, but he
took no notice, so I thought the best thing I could do was to
40 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
slip off. The last I saw of him, his head was bent over his
knee, and he was working hard at his fetter, muttering impa
tient imprecations at it and at his leg. The last I heard of
him, I stopped in the mist to listen, and the file was still
going.
CHAPTER IV.
I fully expected to find a constable in the kitchen, waiting
to take me up. But not only was there no constable there,
but no discovery had yet been made of the robbery. Mrs
Joe was prodigiously busy in getting the house ready for the
festivities of the day, and Joe had been put upon the kitchen
door-step to keep him out of the dust-pan▒an article into
which his destiny always led him sooner or later when my sister
was vigorously reaping the floors of her establishment.
" And where the deuce ha' you been ?" was Mrs. Joe's Christ
mas salutation, when I and my conscience showed ourselves.
I said I had been down to hear the Carols. "Ah 1 well !"
observed Mrs. Joe. "You might ha' done worse." "Not a
doubt of it," I thought.
"Perhaps if I warn't a blacksmith's wife, and (what's the
same thing) a slave with her apron never off, I should have
been to hear the Carols," said Mrs. Joe. "I'm rather partial
to Carols myself, and that's the best of reasons for my never
hearing any."
Joe, who had ventured into the kitchen after me as the dust
pan retired before us, drew the back of his hand across his
nose with a conciliatory air when Mrs. Joe darted a look at
him, and, when her eyes were withdrawn, secretly crossed
his two forefingers, and exhibited them to iue, as our token that
Mrs. Joe was in a cross temper. This was so much her normal
state, that Joe and I would often, for weeks together, be, as
to our fingers, like monumental Crusaders as to their legs.
We were to have a superb dinner, consisting of a leg of
pickled pork, and greens, and a pair of roast stuffed fowls. A
handsome mince-pie had been made yesterday morning (which
accounted for the mince-meat not being missed), and the pud
ding was already on the boil. These extensive arrangements
occasioned us to be cut off unceremoniously in respect of break
(41)
42 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
fast, "fori an't," said Mrs. Joe, "I an't a going to have no
cramming and gorging and washing up now, with what I've got
before me, I promise you 1"
So we had our slices served out, as if we were two thousand
troops on a forced march, instead of a man and boy at home;
and we took gulps of milk and water, with apologetic counte
nances, from a jug on the dresser. In the meantime Mrs. Joe
put clean white curtains up, and tacked a new flowered
flounce across the wide chimney to replace the old one, and
uncovered the little state parlor across the passage, which was
never uncovered at any other time, but passed the rest of the
year in a cool haze of silver paper, which even extended to the
four little white crockery poodles on the mantle shelf, each with
a black nose, and a basket of flowers in his mouth, and each the
counterpart of the other. Mrs. Joe was a very clean house
keeper, but had an exquisite art of making her cleanliness more
uncomfortable and unacceptable than dirt itself. Cleanliness
is next to Godliness, and some people do the same by their
religion.
My sister having so much to do, was going to church vica
riously ; that is to say, Joe and I were going. In his working
clothes Joe was a well-knit, characteristic-looking blacksmith ;
in his holiday clothes, he was more like a scarecrow in good
circumstances than any thing else. Nothing that he wore then
fitted him or seemed to belong to him, and every thing that he
wore then grazed him. On the present festive occasion he
emerged from his room, when the blithe bells were going, the
picture of misery in a full suit of Sunday penitentials. As to
me, I think my sister must have had some general idea that I
was a young offender whom an Accoucheur Policeman had taken
up (on my birthday), and delivered over to her to be dealt with
according to the outraged majesty of the law. I was always
treated as if I had insisted on being born in opposition to the
dictates of reason, religion, and morality, and against the dis
suading arguments of my best friends ; even when I was taken
to have a new suit of clothes, the tailor had orders to make
them like a kind of Reformatory, and on no account to let me
have the use of my limbs.
Joe and I going to church, therefore, must have been a mov
GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
lug spectacle for compassionate minds. Yet what I suffered
outside was nothing to what I underwent within. The terrors
that had assailed me whenever Mrs. Joe had gone near the
pantry or out of the room, were only to be equaled by the
remorse with which my mind dwelt on what my hands had done.
Under the weight of my wicked secret I pondered whether the
Church would be powerful enough to shield me from the ven
geance of the terrible young man, if I divulged it to that
establishment. I conceived the idea that the time when the bans
were read and when the clergyman said, " Ye are now to de
clare it 1" would be the time for me to rise and propose a
private audience in the vestry. I am far from being quite sure
that I might not have astonished our small congregation by
resorting to this extreme measure, but for its being Christmas
Day and no Sunday.
Mr. Wopsle, the clerk at church, was to dine with us; and
Mr. Hubble the wheel-wright and Mrs. Hubble; and Uncle
Pumblechook (Joe's uncle, but Mrs. Joe appropriated him),
who was a well-to-do corn-chandler in the nearest town, and
drove his own chaise-cart. The dinner hour was half-past one.
When Joe at.d I got home we found the table laid, and Mrs.
Joe dressed, and the dinner dressing, and the front door un
locked (it never was at any other time) for the company to enter
by, and every thing most splendid. And still, not a word of
the robbery.
The time came without bringing with it any relief to my feel
ings, and the company came. Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman
nose and a large bald forehead, had a deep sonorous voice which
he was proud of ; indeed it was understood among his acquaint
ance that if you could only give him his head he would read
the clergyman into fits ; he himself confessed that if the Church
was "thrown open," meaning to competition, he would not
despair of making his mark in it. The Church not being
" thrown open," he was, as I have said, our clerk. But he fin
ished the Amens tremendously ; and when he gave out the
psalm▒always giving us the whole verse▒he looked all round
the congregation first, as much as to say, " You have heard my
friend overhead; oblige me with your opinion of this!"
I opened the door to the company▒making believe that it
44 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
was a habit of ours to open that door▒and I opened it first
to Mr. Wopsle, next to Mr. and Mrs. Hubble, and last of all
to Uncle Pumblechook. N. B. I was not allowed to call him
uncle under the severest penalties.
" Mrs. Joe," said Uncle Pumblechook, who was a large,
hard-breathing, middle-aged, slow man, with a mouth like a fish,
dull staring eyes, and sandy hair standing upright on his head,
so that he looked as if he had just been choked, and had
that very moment come to, " I have brought you, as the com
pliments of the season▒I have brought you, Mum, a bottle
of sherry wine, and I have brought you, Mum, a bottle of port
wine."
Every Christmas Day he presented himself, as a profound
novelty, with exactly the same words, and carrying the two
bottles like dumb-bells. Every Christmas Day, Mrs. Joe re
plied, as she now replied, " Oh, Un▒cle Pum ▒ble▒chook 1
This is kind 1" Every Christmas Day, he retorted, as he now
retorted, " It's no more than your merits. And how are you
all ▒bobbish ? And how's Sixpennorth of half pence 1" mean
ing me.
We dined on these occasions in the kitchen, and adjourned,
for the nuts and oranges and apples, to the parlor; which was
a change very like Joe's change from his working clothes to his
Sunday's dress. My sister was uncommonly lively on the pre
sent occasion, and indeed was generally more gracious in the
society of Mrs. Hubble than in any other company. I remem
ber Mrs. Hubble as a little, sharp-eared person in curly skyblue,
who held a conventionally juvenile position, because she
had married Mr. Hubble▒I don't know at what remote period
▒when she was much younger than he. I remember Mr.
Hubble as a tough, high-shouldered, stooping old man, of a
saw-dusty fragrance, with his legs extraordinarily wide apart,
so that in my short and early days I always saw some miles of
open country between them when I met him coming up the lane.
Among this good company I should have felt myself, even if
I hadn't rubbed the pantry, in a false position. Not because I
was squeezed in at an acute angle of the table-cloth with the
table in my chest, and the Pumblechookian elbow in my eye ;
not because I was not allowed to speak (I didn't want to speak),
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 45
nor because I was regaled with the scaly tips of the drumstick!
of the fowls, and with those corners of obscure pork of which
the pig, when living, had had the least reason to be vain. No ;
I should not have minded that, if they would only have left me
alone. But they wouldn't leave me alone. They seemed to
think the opportunity lost, if they failed to point the conversa
tion at me every now and then, and stick the point into me. I
might have been an unfortunate little bull in a Spanish arena:
I got so smartingly touched up by these moral goads.
It began the moment we sat down to dinner. Mr. Wopsle
said grace with theatrical declamation, as it now appears to me,
something like a religious cross of the Ghost in Hamlet with
Richard the Third▒and ended with the very proper aspiration
that we might be truly grateful. Upon which my sister instantly
fixed me with her eye, and said, in a low, reproachful voice, " Do
you hear that? Be grateful."
" Especially," said Mr. Pumblechook, " be grateful, boy, to
them which brought you up by hand."
Mrs. Hubble shook her head, and contemplating me with
a mournful presentiment that I should come to no good, asked,
" Why is it that the young are never grateful ?" This mystery
seemed too much for the company until Mr. Hubble tersely
solved it by saying, "Naturally wicious." Everybody then
murmured " Ah 1" and " True 1" and looked at me in a particu
larly unpleasant and personal manner.
Joe's station and influence were something feebler (if possible)
when there was company than when there was none. But he
always aided and abetted when he could, in some way of his own,
and he always did so at dinner-time by giving me gravy, if there
were any. There being plenty of gravy to-day, Joe spooned
into my plate, at this point, about half-a-pint.
A little later on in the dinner, Mr. Wopsle reviewed the
sermon with some severity, and intimated in the usual hypo
thetical case of the Church being " thrown open," what kind
of sermon he would have given them. After favoring them with
some heads of that discourse, he remarked that he considered
the subject of the day's homily ill chosen ; which was the less
excusable, he added, when there were so many subjects "going
about."
46 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
" True again," said Uncle Pumblechook. " You've hit it▒
plenty of subjects going about, for them that know how to put
salt upon their tails. That's what's wanted. A man needn't go
far to find a subject if he's ready with his salt box. Why,"
added Mr. Pumblechook, after a short interval of deep reflec
tion, " look at Pork alone. There's a subject 1 If you want
subject, look at Pork 1"
" True, Sir. Many a moral for the young," returned Mr.
Wopsle ; and I knew he was going to bring me in before ho
said it, "might be deducted from that text."
(" You listen to this," said my sister to me, in a severe paren
thesis.)
Joe gave me some more gravy.